On a computer, there are two types of memory: persistent and temporary. When you run a Python script, you create several variables and objects whose lifetime is that of your script. Once the script ends, your variables are *cleared* from memory. If you want to persist data from your script, you need to save it to file. **Files** are persistent data. The script you write is stored in a file. If you write an essay, you tend to save it in a word processor *file*. Today, we're going to explore the basics of opening, reading and writing to files.

To open a file, you need to use the Python function `open()` which takes two parameters: a file and a mode and returns a file pointer. The file is a string that points to a file in any directory. This means you might have to list the file path to a particular file you want to read or write from. For instance, `/home/Dustin/Documents/Codecademy/example.txt` is the absolute path (more on this next week) I will be performing file I/O (input/output).The mode can be one of several strings. They include `"r"`, `"rb"`, `"r+"`, `"rb+"`, `"w"`, `"wb"`, `"w+"`, `"wb+"`, `"a"`, `"a+"`, `"ab"`, `"ab+"`. `r` stands for **r**ead, `w` stands for **w**rite, and `a` stands for **a**ppend. The `+` indicates that you want to add a read mode to any write type modes or a write mode to the read mode. `b` indicates you want your output to be in binary. Read starts reading data from the beginning of a file. Writing truncates (empties) the files and starts writing from the beginning of the file. Appending just starts writing to the file from the end of the document. Finally, `open()` returns a file pointer so we can perform operations on a file. Hence, we need to set it equal to some variable. See line 1 of [PythonIO.py][1] for an example of opening a file with mode `w`.

Anytime you open a file, you should make sure you `close()` it before your
script ends. If you leave too many files open, you will cause problems on your operating system for advanced reasons we'll discuss at a later date. Closing a file is simple, you simply call `close()` on the file pointer. See line 3 of [PythionIO.py][1] for how it's done.

To write to a file, you need to use the `write` function. `write` takes a single string and writes it sequentially to the file. It writes from the last location in the file the file pointer was located. To read a file, you need to use the `read` function which returns a string. `read` takes an optional parameter for the number of bytes to read. This is an advanced topic and will be discussed later. An important note is that when you open a file, the read pointer is put at the beginning of the file. However, if you do a read after an append or a write operation, the pointer is moved and you will start reading from the file pointer until the end of the file. Notice how the third example in [PythonIO.py][1] doesn't print any data but a newline. That's because the file pointer wasn't reset before a read. We'll teach you how to do this next week.

These are all the basic tools you need to read and write from a file. Check out [PythonIO.py][1] for a few examples of how to do file I/O. Otherwise, that's it for this week. Enjoy!

  [1]: https://gist.github.com/sharocko/5530045